# Data-Science-Climate-Change

Project Summary

In this project, we were able to achieve a good predictive ability for wheat yields. Such a predictive ability is very important from many perspectives. First, it would allow farmers to predict the crop yields of coming years in such a way that they would be able to eliminate uncertainty from crop productions. Also, if the predictive power of this model gets high enough, we would be able to integrate it with other models such as weather models, soil assessment surveys etc. in order to predict future development of crop yields. 

The most important limitation of this project is the fact that crop yields are dependent on very precise measurements of sensitive data. Small changes in the data incur big changes in the crop yields. This present complexity that we observed was complemented by a lack of available and precise datasets. For example, the only soil survey data that we found were for the years 1996, 2001, 2006, and 2011. As such, we had to impute values for the other years. Imputing this way does not present a big challenge over years that are close to each other, as soil characteristics generally change very little on the timescale of years, however, they do very much change on the timescale of decades. Another improvement that could be done is to add more columns to the dataset. A good column to add is the minimum and maximum temperature of each year in each county. While it is true that the average temperature does tell us about the crop yields, the minimum and the maximum would be able to inform us about potential spikes in crop yields. This is a consequence of the fact that crops are very sensitive to high and low temperatures. That is, after a certain threshold whole crop fields will be annihilated because of high or low temperatures. As such, we deduce that our project definitely suffers from the quality of data.

Our project can grow across many dimensions. Firstly, we could add more data, and ensure it is of good quality and precise measurement. Secondly, we could add more details to hyperparameter tuning and tune our models even more. Lastly, we could apply our project in a real-life scenario and get feedback from clients, and based on that we can know what other important aspects we missed that we could further implement. 

In the case of modeling, we think that our methods were appropriate to the problem. This can generally be seen with a good predictive ability even for simpler types of models such as linear regression. In fact, linear regression in our case seems to have an unreasonable effectiveness. This is probably caused by the most important feature in our dataset: the value of the previous year. One can come to the reasonable conclusion that this value that tells us a lot about future yields, shares a very high correlation with the value we are trying to predict. However, if possible, such a value in the future should be eliminated. The purpose of such an elimination is warranted from the fact that using such a value would not enable us to generalize the model to future farming endeavors which are unexpected. 

Some limitations such as data availability can hardly be controlled by a data scientist. The quality of data, and availability of data are generally produced by national surveyors that have a limited reach. However, in the future, we might see an improvement in the data availability of certain attributes due to the interest of the farming researchers and communities in IOT devices. Furthermore, some features are inaccessible to us, such as pesticide, insecticide, grains used, etc. as those “recipes” are generally kept secret in the bigger farming communities.

In conclusion, this project can definitely grow to be applied in real life situations.


